
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75870 ***





  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                       LITTLE BLUE BOOK NO. 1435
                      Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

                          Constipation and Its
                         Correction by Exercise

                              C. O. Benson

                   (Instructor of Physical Education,
                         Washington University,
                            St. Louis, Mo.)


                      HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                             GIRARD, KANSAS




                            Copyright, 1929,
                        Haldeman-Julius Company


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




                               CONTENTS


                                                                    Page

  Causes of Constipation                                               7

  Exercises for the Prevention and Correction
  of Constipation                                                     20




              CONSTIPATION AND ITS CORRECTION BY EXERCISE


Constipation or dyskinesia is one of the important influences in making
people old before their time. The breaking down of the faculties and
functions supposed to be due to old age is in reality due to the
accumulation of waste and bacteria in the intestines. A habit of life
which keeps the bowels clean will set “old age” back to the time when
men will enjoy perfect health to the utmost limit of a normal span of
years (at the present time the normal span is fifty-eight years).

There are many people who think they are quite normal, though they
never had a regular daily movement of the bowels without the aid of
laxatives in years. Yet, these same persons will not let the gasoline
line on their automobile stay clogged one day.

The body is a very delicate organism and it must be taken care of in
a thoughtful fashion. A poisoned night is spent if a day is missed
without a bowel movement, for the body cannot carry waste a great
length of time without serious injury to it. Under a normal life the
bowels should move at least once a day without artificial aid.


_Results of Constipation_

When food remains too long in the body it decays, putrefies, and
develops into very active poisons. With this decaying comes a
depressing feeling caused by these wastes being absorbed into the
blood. Then, to make matters worse, this putrification retards the
bowel action, thus keeping the poisons in the body. Thus, constipation
results. Some of these poisons are not so harmful, yet others are very
capable of infecting the body, and these enter the blood stream via
the intestines and reach other organs where they may cause a chronic
disease.

Constipation brings many other ills besides that of poisoning and
infecting the body. If this decay occurs too frequently, very serious
infections may develop. Frequently diseases associated with old age,
such as rheumatism, kidney trouble, and disturbances of the gall
bladder are the result of a constipated condition which has run for
years. The retained masses of putrefied food in the digestive tract
many times displaces and distends the bowels with the ultimate result
that it reacts on the nervous system and the circulation of the
liver, and causes much suffering. Appendicitis is often traced to the
continuous constipated condition.

Other results of constipation can be dizziness, offensive breath,
headache, loss of pep and vitality, bad temper, poor complexion,
stomach disorders, skin eruptions, sleepless nights, loss of appetite,
stupor, and piles.




                        CAUSES OF CONSTIPATION


_Lack of Exercise_

One who leads an inactive life must expect to have a flabby body.
Lack of exercise lowers the tone of the whole body and especially the
abdominal viscera. This is an unhealthy way to live, for it offers no
incentive to the stomach and intestines for the vigorous digestion of
food. A good workout daily will stimulate and tone the intestines for
better functioning.

Unless your work involves a great deal of outdoor walking, a daily
walk cannot be over-estimated in the treatment of constipation. Learn
to stride along with the head and chest up, breathing deeply. Walking
in this fashion will do as much good the last ten minutes as the
first ten. This exercise will stimulate the appetite and increase the
physical and mental tone of the body. It is a life-enriching as well
as life-purifying habit.

Learn to take a few workouts in the gym every week, that is, if you are
physically able. However, before you plan your workout have your health
doctor plan your program and limitations and what it should include.

In the back of the book will be found exercises that will aid in
the correction of constipation. These exercises will be found very
beneficial if used daily.


_Improper Diet_

One of the chief causes of constipation is improper diet. Correct
feeding alone may cure constipation. Even this rule has its exception,
for there is a form of constipation associated with proper diet. This
brings out the point that it is essential to have a health examination
frequently by your family doctor, for he will give you correct
knowledge of the condition of your body immediately.

Before taking up the matter of food, it must be remembered that the
purpose of this book is to give exercises to cure constipation and not
to plan a diet. Your doctor will give you a correct diet. However, it
is essential that the food should be chewed until it is almost a pulp
before swallowing. This will aid the stomach and whole digestive tract
in assimilating the food.

The spirit of happiness and cheerfulness is important when eating. It
cannot be over-emphasized. In fact, laughter during the meal time is
very good for the digestive tract in digesting the food. This buoyancy
of the mind will aid a great deal in the correction of constipation. It
is the only exercise that can be used successfully while eating. Do not
be downcast while eating, as this will prevent normal digestion.

The typical breakfast is usually orange juice, eggs, toast or rolls
and coffee. This breakfast will satisfy hunger and supply energy, but
it does not meet the demands of health. It is true that this breakfast
includes the necessary nutriments, but it does not contain bulk or
roughage, which are sometimes desirable in order to give the bowels
something to work upon.

In order to give the body foods with roughage bran may be used in
moderation. However, bran does not agree with everyone. The indulgence
in this food should depend upon the advice of your physician.

Fruit will cure constipation quicker than any constipation remedies
ever advertised. Oranges, orange juice, figs, dates, and prunes
are very good for the prevention as well as the correction of
constipation. It is a very excellent idea to have some form of fruit
for every meal. It cannot be over-emphasized.

Vegetables are an absolute necessity in everyone’s diet. Nature gives
us food values that cannot be estimated in importance. They clean the
interior of the body and act as a broom in the digestive tract, that
is, if they are eaten twice a day. They are a mechanical necessity
to the intestines. Their bulk is absolutely needed to stimulate the
intestines to activity.

Foods which contain no mechanical stimulation such as purées and
gruel are open to objection. Pastries are very constipating due to
the pasty element, for the secretions of the digestive tract cannot
assimilate them. The psychic effect of a monotonous diet may cause
poor digestion resulting in constipation. Such foods as eggs, milk,
cheese--particularly cottage, pot smearcase and cream, white rice, tea,
chocolate are said to be constipating because they seem to slow up the
action of the intestinal tract.

On the whole, eat foods that originally gave the human race its vigor,
and you will get all the food values, the sunshine, and fresh air,
which that food has absorbed during the days of its growth.


_Laxatives_

Laxatives do not cure constipation. They may serve to make it chronic.
Yet one fourth of the people use them regularly. They only give
artificial stimulation to the bowel movements. Every laxative, no
matter how innocent in itself, is a habit forming drug for the bowels.
They lash the bowel into action once or twice or a few times. After
that the bowels will refuse to work without a laxative administered.
The dose becomes larger and larger until heroic doses are consumed. NO
LAXATIVE OR ANY FORM OF BOWEL WASHING SHOULD BE TAKEN UNLESS ADVISED BY
A PHYSICIAN.


_Posture_

Poor posture ranks on a par with lack of exercise and improper diet in
the cause of constipation. Poor posture aids in the slipping of the
abdominal organs out of their respective places, resulting in a tangled
mass which will act as an interference on the normal bowel action. As
a general rule, poor posture hinders deep breathing. Thus, there is no
compressing movement upon the organs of the abdominal regions, such as
is found in a normal upright person. Deep, vigorous breathing is an aid
to a normal bowel movement. Good posture is an absolute necessity for
the freedom of the bowel acting.


_During Defecation_

Faulty posture during defecation causes insufficient emptying or
difficulty in moving the bowels at all. Many closet seats are too high.
The proper altitude is one that brings the knees a little higher than
the posterior.

A high closet seat can be remedied by using a footstool to support the
feet, thus bringing the body into proper posture.


_Hurried Defecation_

A normal defecation ordinarily takes about two to three minutes, but
owing to the abuse of resisting the call, ordinary defecation is not
always secured in the normal time. Thus residue is left in the large
intestine. This offers difficulty when a call comes some later hour,
for the residue becomes hard and dry. This residue in the colon results
in the condition known as


_Irregularity in Answering Call_

Irregularity in answering nature’s call causes irregularity of bowel
action. Nature’s call means that enough waste is in the colon to cause
automatic processes to set in action the bowel movement.

If for any reason the bowels are not permitted to move at once, the
call usually disappears in a few minutes and may not reappear for some
time. Thus, the wastes lie in the colon with the water in them being
absorbed by the intestine, causing the wastes to become dry. Due to
these wastes remaining in the intestine distention is produced in
the colon and defecation may become difficult or impossible without
mechanical aid.

The water of the waste which is absorbed into the blood stream affects
the body, causing lower vitality and fatigue affecting the nerves.


_Treatment_

Hygiene is an important factor in restoring the body to a condition
of health. The various abuses of the body that make for constipation
should be corrected. General habits, and especially that of neglecting
nature’s call, should be corrected. Without good hygiene the treatment
of constipation cannot be successful.


_Proper Diet_

See your doctor and have him make out a proper diet. However, the diet
should contain a sufficient amount of roughage, such as vegetables,
fruits, and bran. Milk should be used for its vitamin qualities and
nourishment.


_Rules for Proper Eating_

1. Do not eat too much.

2. Do not study your food while eating.

3. Enjoy what you eat.

4. Chew your food until it swallows itself.

5. Eat regularly.

6. Do not eat when tired.

7. Take a brisk short walk after eating, as this is an aid to the
digestive processes.


_Laxatives and Enemas_

These should be used only upon the consent of your doctor. They do not
cure, and if possible should be avoided.


_Mental Attitude_

Patience is necessary, and the feeling “I can’t” should be changed to
“I will.” This feeling can do more than drugs. Do not hurry defecation.


_Regularity_

Visit the toilet at least once a day--not to read but to move the
bowels. Aim to establish a habit by visiting the toilet the same time
every day.


_Use of Water_

Most people drink too little water. Six glasses of water a day is the
minimum and eight are better. Even more should be taken in hot weather.
Avoid ice water, for it chills the stomach. If ice water is the only
water available, sip it slowly.

Water should be taken freely between meals. A glass at each meal will
help digestion, and there is nothing that so helps the bowels as a
glass or two of water before retiring.


_Bathing_

After taking the exercises described in the back of the book a bath
should be taken. Take a shower or tub bath for two minutes with the
temperature between 95° and 100° F. for cleansing purposes. This should
be followed by a quick cold rub over the entire body. Dry with a rough
towel until the skin glows. This should be followed by a cold wet towel
rubbed on the abdomen for a few minutes until it attains a reddish
glow. Then dry the body thoroughly, dress quickly, and you will have a
keen appetite for the morning meal.


_Exercises_

The effectiveness of certain exercises in overcoming constipation has
been scientifically proved. Diet alone will not cure constipation. Diet
and exercise should be used together, and the victim of constipation
should not neglect either. Suitable diet and proper exercises can
usually be relied upon to cure the most obstinate case of constipation.
They will very frequently banish that tired feeling and make one tingle
with energy and vitality.

Every one needs exercise other than his work, for work tires the same
old muscles and the same old back day after day, while it neglects the
vital muscles around the waist. Work wearies, while exercise refreshes.
Exercise builds up the muscular system and makes work easier. Exercise
may be harmful if too vigorous, and if the patient is not accustomed
to it. These exercises as described below should be indulged in mildly
at first, and as the body becomes accustomed to exercise increase the
dosage.

Monotony in doing the same old exercise cannot be condemned too
vigorously. It is better to spread the dosage of work around the
different parts of the body rather than to concentrate too vigorously
on the muscles of the waist. The continuous repetition of certain
movements results in fatigue, which causes atonic conditions about the
parts involved.

Regular exercises in the open air and getting the abdominal muscles
and organs in first rate condition is the first step in securing
longevity of life and renewed vitality. This will increase the appetite
and strengthen the voluntary muscles of defecation. Vigorous exercise
diverts the thoughts from business and household cares and relieves
an important factor in constipation. Hill climbing, walking, running,
horseback riding, and all forms of games are the best forms of exercise
for the cure of constipation. It so happens in many cases that the
individual is not physically fit for such activities, and then the
following exercises cannot be used to advantage until the patient is
able to participate in recreative exercises and games.

In the following exercises that of raising both legs to a right angle
from the lying position is purposely omitted because of the severe
action on the abdomen and the paralyzing effect on the sensitive
nervous systems of that region. Often an exaggerated condition of
constipation comes from this type of exercise.

In the following exercises it must be remembered that good posture is
necessary for the proper effect on the vital organs.


      EXERCISES FOR THE PREVENTION AND CORRECTION OF CONSTIPATION


EXERCISE 1

_Position_: Lying on back on floor, hands on sides, legs straight.

_Action_: Arch the body upward, forming a bridge with the weight
resting on the heels and shoulders.

_Remarks_: This is an excellent exercise before retiring. It can be
done ten to twenty times without fatigue.


EXERCISE 2

_Position_: Feet apart, arms side shoulder level.

_Action_: Twist the body to the right side, bend slightly forward,
keeping the knees straight and touch the right foot with the left hand,
the right arm being stretched straight up over the body toward the
ceiling. Exhale and draw abdomen well in. Repeat exercise twisting the
body to the left side and touching left foot with right hand.


EXERCISE 3

_Position_: Lying on back on floor, hands by sides, legs straight with
the weight of from two to four pounds on the abdomen.

_Action_: Breathe slowly and deeply. The abdomen should rise and fall
rhythmically as you breathe.


EXERCISE 4

_Position_: Body erect and on toes.

_Action_: Full knee bend, extend arms forward. Exhale and draw abdomen
in. Rise to normal position, keeping abdomen in. Raise the chest and
then inhale.


EXERCISE 5

_Position_: Feet apart, arms side shoulder level. Twist the body to the
right side, lean slightly over the right knee; inhale. Return to normal
position, then repeat to the left side.

_Remarks_: All twisting is done above the hips.


EXERCISE 6

_Position_: Stand erect with chest up, chin in.

_Action_: Bend or sway from side to side, moving from the hips only.

_Remarks_: The arms should wave loosely like the branches of a tree.


EXERCISE 7

_Position_: Lying on back on floor, hands by sides, legs straight.

_Action_: Draw the right knee to the chest and exhale. As the right
knee is returned to its normal position the left knee is drawn to the
chest.

_Remarks_: A variation of this exercise for those whose abdominal
muscles are weak, the knee may be lifted to the chest and compressed to
it by both arms being wrapped around it.


EXERCISE 8

_Position_: Lying on back with the body well relaxed.

_Action_: Expand the chest, pulling it well up and letting the abdomen
become hollow. Count six. Then make the chest small, pushing down and
making the abdomen large and count two.

_Remarks_: Do this three to five times without breathing; then take
several slow, long breaths. Repeat this exercise from fifteen to twenty
times. A variation of this exercise may be done by getting down on all
fours like a cat, and doing this exercise.


EXERCISE 9

_Position_: Stand erect with hands resting on hips.

_Action_: Raise the right knee until it is at right angles with the
body, with the toes pointing towards the floor. Extend the foot
forward until knee is straight and stretch. Return leg to normal
position and repeat with the left leg.


EXERCISE 10

_Position_: Stand erect with hands resting on hips.

_Action_: Stationary run, with high knee action, that is, bring your
knees up well in front of you and land on the balls of the feet.


EXERCISE 11

_Position_: Same as Exercise 10.

_Action_: Draw the right knee to the chest and squeeze with both arms.
Raise on toe of the left foot. Replace the right leg and continue
exercise by repeating with the left leg.

_Remarks_: An alternate compression and stretching movement is given
the abdominal organs.


EXERCISE 12

_Position_: Stand erect with fingers interlaced behind the neck.

_Action_: Draw the abdomen in; lift the chest and look straight up
towards the ceiling directly above you. Turn your head slowly to the
right and then to the left.

_Remarks_: Do this exercise about six times. This is a very good
exercise before taking the morning shower or bath.


EXERCISE 13

_Position_: Stand erect with the hands above the head.

_Action_: Bend body forward and touch toes with the hands. Exhale and
draw in the abdomen. Return to the normal position and inhale.


EXERCISE 14

_Position_: Lying on back with the hands tightly closed on the
shoulders.

_Action_: Lift the chest and take a deep breath. Put your head back;
then bend the body to the right. Stretch the left arm forward and the
right sideward. Stretch vigorously. Exhale and return to the normal
position. Repeat to the left side.

_Remarks_: This is an excellent first exercise in the morning workout.
It can be done while lying in bed. Yawn, stretch, and grunt as much as
you wish for the circulation is stimulated.


EXERCISE 15

_Position_: Sitting on chair directly below the chandelier or light
fixture.

_Action_: Keeping head directly underneath chandelier, make a circle
with the abdomen from right to left, or from left to right. Crumple
down, then straighten up and you are making your circle.

_Remarks_: Do this ten to twenty times. It is one of the best exercises
for the cure and prevention of constipation. It may take some time
before one can make the circle in a real circular fashion.


EXERCISE 16

_Position_: Feet together, standing with the hands above the head.

_Action_: Twist the body to the left side. Place the left hand on the
hip, and with the body in that twisted position, touch the outside of
the left heel with the right hand and exhale. Return to normal position
and repeat to the right side.

_Remarks_: Knees should be straight during the entire exercise. It may
be impossible to touch the heel, but stretch down as far as possible.
In returning to the normal erect position, bring the hand out and up.


EXERCISE 17

_Position_: Lie on the back in form of a cross with arms extended.

_Action_: Carry right foot up to the left until it touches the left
hand. Repeat, using left foot touching right hand.

_Remarks_: A difficult variation of this exercise may be done by doing
the exercise in a standing position.


EXERCISE 18

_Position_: Lying on back with arms above head on floor keeping knees
straight.

_Action_: Assume a sitting position and touch toes with hands; exhale.
Return to sitting position, keeping abdomen in; then slowly return to
the normal position. Stretch and then inhale deeply.


EXERCISE 19

_Position_: Body erect, hands on hips, feet apart with knees straight.

_Action_: Bend to right, then to left.

_Remarks_: Do not bend too far backwards. Repeat this exercise about a
dozen times.


EXERCISE 20

_Position_: Body erect, chest up, feet apart.

_Action_: Turn head and shoulders to right as far as possible. Then
swing arms, head and shoulders in the opposite direction.

_Remarks_: Waist muscles should be as lax and lifeless as possible. Let
them twine around the body as if tied to the body with strings. This
should be a daily exercise and can be used by people of all ages. It is
very beneficial.


EXERCISE 21

_Position_: Stand erect with hands on hips.

_Action_: Bend right and reach towards floor or ground. Reverse
movement to left.

_Remarks_: In reaching towards floor bring the hand only to the knee
at first and then with each successive stretch bend a little lower
until ground is reached. This exercise is very helpful in preventing or
curing constipation and torpid liver.


EXERCISE 22

_Position_: Stand erect, hands on hips, feet apart.

_Action_: Swing hips as far to right as possible then to left. Keep
head as nearly as possible in starting position.

_Remarks_: Hold hips a second or two in each position: _i. e._, right
or left.


EXERCISE 23

_Position_: Body erect, hands on hips.

_Action_: Bend forward very slowly, hinging only at hips, while keeping
back straight and face to front. Bend low enough so that back is
parallel to floor. Return to normal position slowly.

_Remarks_: You will not like this exercise at first, but it is a very
helpful exercise. Repeat exercise three to five times.


EXERCISE 24

_Position_: Stand erect with hands high above the head.

_Action_: Bend to right and bring hands to floor near the right foot,
going down slowly. Reverse movement and swing hands directly over head
and down to floor near left foot.

_Remarks_: Repeat in each direction four or five times. Combine deep
breathing with this exercise; exhale as you bend in one direction and
inhale as you reverse movement.


EXERCISE 25

_Position_: Stand erect with hands on hips, feet together.

_Action_: Bend forward until back and legs are at right angles. Turn
right by pivoting at waist and swing head and shoulders around in
a large circle until they have been returned to starting position.
Reverse movement and swing around in opposite direction.

_Remarks_: Keep knees straight. Do not bend too far backwards.
This is a very strenuous but very effective waist strengthener and
liver stimulating exercise. (Do not use until you are accustomed to
exercising.)


EXERCISE 26

_Position_: Stand erect.

_Action_: Take a full breath, hold it, reach out right and left, close
fists tightly and tense arms. Repeat two or three times. Now take
another deep breath and reach as far as you can with the feet while
tensing the muscles of the legs.

_Remarks_: This is an excellent exercise in beginning the morning
workout.


EXERCISE 27

_Position_: Lying on back very lax and lifeless.

_Action_: Take a full, deep breath very smoothly through the nostrils
and at the same time expand the abdominal muscles as much as possible.
Hold breath a few seconds, relax waist and abdominal muscles very
slowly and then draw in and upward and exhale. Repeat five to ten times
or oftener.

_Remarks_: One of the best exercises a frail, weak person can take and
quite as valuable for strong folk.


EXERCISE 28

_Position_: Stand erect, arms on level with shoulders.

_Action_: Swing right foot around to a position two feet from left
side of left foot thus twisting the legs. At the same time swing head
and shoulders as far around to right as possible while keep the arms
straight and in line with each other. Reverse and swing as far as
possible to the left.

_Remarks_: Repeat exercise eight to sixteen times. This is a good
exercise to strengthen and make flexible a good many muscles of the
body.


EXERCISE 29

_Position_: Stand erect, hands on hips.

_Action_: Right foot raised backward, bend forward until back and legs
are at right angles, exhale. Return to normal position. Repeat exercise
four times to both sides.


EXERCISE 30

_Position_: Stand erect with chest up, chin in.

_Action_: Expand chest and abdominal muscles suddenly while bringing
hands up quickly above head at the same time taking a deep breath just
as quickly as possible through the nostrils. Hold breath a few seconds
then exhale very slowly as you lower hands to starting points. Repeat
three to five times. Now take breath very slowly while bringing arms
up laterally till hands meet above head. Bring arms back to sides very
quickly and suddenly exhale completely through mouth. Repeat three to
five times.

_Remarks_: Another part can be added to the above exercise by taking a
deep breath and counting fifty without taking more breath.

The above exercises should be indulged in as you arise in the morning.
They will give you pep and vitality that is needed to carry on a
successful day. They will give the abdominal organs the workout that
will prevent and correct constipation.

These exercises are in reality liver regulators. You will undoubtedly
discover after doing these exercises that you feel better in every way.

It is essential to take several deep, long breaths between each
exercise. Do not do the same exercises every morning. Pick out five and
do them vigorously for fifteen minutes. There are enough exercises for
six days of the week; thus you will not become tired of the monotony of
exercises.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added,
  when a predominant preference was found in the original book.

  All misspellings in the text, and inconsistent or archaic usage,
  have been retained.

  Page 19. “rythmically” replaced by “rhythmically”.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75870 ***
